.TH FABER 1 "2025-06-18" "Faber" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
faber \- CLI task runner using Gauche Scheme
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faber
[\fBOPTIONS\fR] [\fBTASK\fR] [\fBARGUMENTS\fR] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B faber
is a command-line task runner that uses
.I Gauche Scheme
as its scripting language.
Unlike traditional build systems that rely on custom configuration formats,
faber lets you write task definitions using familiar Scheme syntax in a file
called
.IR faberfile .
.PP
When invoked without a task name, faber runs the task named
.B default
if one exists; otherwise it lists all available tasks.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List all available tasks with their descriptions and exit.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-summary
Print all task names as a space-separated list on a single line.
This is primarily used by shell completion scripts.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-faberfile \ \fIFABERFILE\fR
Use
.I FABERFILE
as the task definition file instead of the default
.IR faberfile .
Both relative and absolute paths are accepted.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-working-directory \ \fIWORKING-DIR\fR
Change to
.I WORKING-DIR
before loading the faberfile and running tasks.
By default faber changes to the directory containing the faberfile.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print the commands being executed and a message before each task runs.
.SH THE FABERFILE
A faberfile is a Gauche Scheme source file.
When faber starts, it loads the faberfile, which defines tasks using the
macros and built-in functions described below.
.SS Pre-imported modules
The following Gauche modules are already imported in every faberfile:
.PP
.RS
.IR scheme.list ,
.IR srfi-13 ,
.IR scheme.show ,
.IR scheme.show.color ,
.IR gauche.process ,
.IR file.util ,
.IR control.pmap
.RE
.PP
Additional modules can be imported at the top of the faberfile with
.BR (use\ \fImodule\fR) .
.SS Task definition
.TP
.BI "(define-task " "name" " (" "args" ") " "body" ")"
Define a new task called
.I name
with the given argument list and body.
.TP
.BI "(deftask " "name" " (" "args" ") " "body" ")"
Alias for
.BR define-task .
.SS Running tasks from within tasks
.TP
.BI "(run-task " "name" " . " "args" ")"
Execute another task by name with the given arguments.
.SS Command execution
.TP
.BI "(run " "command" " :key noerr? quiet?)"
Execute
.I command
(a list of strings).
With
.B :noerr? #t
non-zero exits are ignored.
With
.B :quiet? #t
output is suppressed.
.TP
.BI "(run* " "args" ")"
Like
.B run
but the command and its arguments are passed without quoting as a list, e.g.
.BR (run*\ ls\ -l) .
.TP
.BI "(run->string " "command" " :key noerr?)"
Execute
.I command
and return its output as a single string.
.TP
.BI "(run->string* " "args" ")"
Like
.B run->string
but without quoting the command as a list.
.TP
.BI "(run->lines " "command" " :key noerr?)"
Execute
.I command
and return its output as a list of string lines.
.TP
.BI "(run->lines* " "args" ")"
Like
.B run->lines
but without quoting the command as a list.
.TP
.BI "(run-pipe " "commands" " :key noerr? quiet?)"
Execute a pipeline of commands, piping each command's standard output into the
next command's standard input.
.I commands
is a list of command lists.
.TP
.BI "(run-parallel " "commands" " :key num-threads noerr? quiet?)"
Execute a list of commands concurrently.
With
.B :num-threads
.B n
at most
.I n
commands run at once; otherwise all commands run fully concurrently.
.TP
.BI "(run->file " "command" " " " "filename" " :key noerr?)"
Execute
.I command
and write its output to
.IR filename .
.TP
.BI "(sh " "command" " :key noerr?)"
Execute a
.I command
string through the system shell
.RB ( sys-system ).
.TP
.BI "(exec " "command" ")"
Replace the current process with
.I command
.RB ( sys-exec ).
This function never returns.
.SH ARGUMENTS
Task arguments are passed on the command line after the task name.
Arguments prefixed with
.B :
are interpreted as keyword arguments.
.SS Examples
.PP
.RS
.EX
faber build
faber test-arg world
faber test-key-arg :arg1 value
faber touch /tmp/hello.txt
.EE
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS A simple faberfile
.PP
.RS
.EX
(define-task build ()
  (run '(cc main.c foo.c bar.c -o main)))

(define-task test ()
  (run-task build)
  (run "./test"))

(define-task default ()
  (run-task build))
.EE
.RE
.SS Capturing output
.PP
.RS
.EX
(define-task sloc ()
  (let1 cnt (run->string '(wc -l "*.c"))
    (show #t cnt " lines of code" nl)))
.EE
.RE
.SS Piped commands
.PP
.RS
.EX
(define-task count-lines ()
  (run-pipe '((ls -l) (wc -l))))
.EE
.RE
.SS Parallel execution
.PP
.RS
.EX
(define-task parallel ()
  (run-parallel '((sleep 3) (sleep 5) (sleep 2)))
  ;; with a thread limit of 1
  (run-parallel '((sleep 3) (sleep 5) (sleep 2))
                :num-threads 1))
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I faberfile
Default task definition file, loaded from the current directory or the
directory specified with
.BR \-d .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Used by Gauche's
.I (home-directory)
to locate the user's home directory.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Success.
.TP
1
General error (e.g., faberfile not found, task does not exist, command failed).
.SH SHELL INTEGRATION
.TP
Zsh
Source
.I misc/zsh/faber.plugin.zsh
for task name autocompletion.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR make (1),
.PP
Gauche Scheme Manual:
.UR https://practical-scheme.net/gauche/man/gauche-refe/index.html
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
Faber project.
